The central theme of The Namesake is not necessarily one of experiencing
Americanness and freedom as a departure from bondage, but about the American
immigrant experience as a departure from the familial closeness associated with
Indian (particularly Bengali) culture. More generally, The Namesake does not
need to engage in a (potentially veiled) discussion of American values in
contrast to those denied to its black population, because rather than
describing America as something better than what was departed from, the novel
grapples with many ways in which America is worse, in which the culture is
cold, unwelcoming, and unforgiving. Where the literature of early America
disparaged Europe and elements of the Old World, thus inevitably incorporating
"an Africanist presence--decidedly not American, decidedly other" against which
it could define itself, The Namesake decidedly defines American culture aginst
that of the Bengali heritage its main characters share, and, importantly, finds
the former to be lacking (Morrison 48). The first several pages of the book
grant us a sobering sight of America's "[l]eafless trees with ice-covered
branches", its unwelcoming nature so acute that there is "[n]ot a soul on the
street" (Lahiri 34). Again within the very first chapter, Ashima reflects on
her isolating pregnancy, lamenting that she does not want to raise a child in a
country where she has no family, where "life seems so tentative and spare"
(Lahiri 12). This, in particular, stands in contrast to the tendency of Early
American Literature to romanticize the white man's taming of a savage
wilderness, where the latter is generally represented by an Africanist
presence. Rather, The Namesake analyzes the brutal and lonesome world created
by these same American values, comparing it again to the friendly Bengali
culture which is now an ocean or two away from our main characters.
